---
layout: post
title: "AWS Cloud Concepts Overview"
date: 2025-02-19
tags: [aws]
---

## Introduction to cloud computing

- **Cloudcomputing** is the on-demand delivery of compute power, database, storage, applications, and other IT resources via the internet with pay-as-you-go pricing.

### Infrastructure as hardware :
- Require space, staff, physical security, planning, capital expenditure
- Have a long hardware procurement cycle
- Require you to provision capacity by guessing theoretical maximum peaks

### Infrastructure as software :
- Software solutions are flexible
- Elastically scale resources up and down in an automated fashion
- Helps developers and IT departments avoid undifferentiated work like procurement, maintenance, and capacity planning, thus enabling them to focus on what matters most.

### Cloud service models :
- IaaS (Infrastructure as a service) : access to networking features, computers (virtual or on dedicated hardware), and data storage space

- PaaS (Platform as a service) : hardware and operating systems

- SaaS (Software as a service) : Completed product that the service provider runs and manages. eg. software as a service refers to end-user applications.

### loud computing deployment models
- Cloud : fully deployed in the cloud, and all parts of the application run in the cloud. 

- Hybrid : between the cloud and existing on-premises infrastructure. This model enables an organization to extend and grow their infrastructure into the cloud while connecting cloud resources to internal systems. 

- On-premises(private cloud) : Deploying resources on-premises, using virtualization and resource management tool

> Almost anything you can implement with traditional IT can also be implemented as an AWS cloud computing service.

### Advantage of cloud computing
- Trade capital expense for variable expense
- Benefit from massive economies of scale
- Stop guessing capacity
- Increase speed and agility
- Stop spending money on running and maintaining data centers
- Go global in minutes

## Introduction to Web Service and AWS
- A **web service** is any piece of software that makes itself available over the internet and uses a standardized format—such as *Extensible Markup Language (XML)* or *JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)*—for the request and the response of an application programming interface _(API)_ interaction.

- **AWS** is a secure cloud platform that offers a broad set of global cloud-based products called services that are designed to work together.